README.md, before:

# 📝 Editable DataTable Plugin

A **jQuery plugin** to create editable DataTables with **inline**, **bubble**, and **full-row editing** modes. Built using **jQuery**, **DataTables**, and **Bootstrap**, it allows users to interactively **add, edit, and delete** table records with various input types like text, date, and select.

---

## 🚀 Features

- ✏️ **Multiple Editing Modes**: Inline, bubble, and row-based editing.
- ➕ **Add & Delete Records**: Manage records via modals and checkboxes.
- 🛠️ **Customizable Columns**: Supports `text`, `date`, and `select` input types.
- ☑️ **Checkbox Selection**: Bulk-select rows for deletion.
- 🔢 **Number Formatting**: Supports number formatting for fields like salary or quantity.
- 🆓 **Open Source**: MIT License – free to use and modify.

---

## 📦 Prerequisites

Ensure the following dependencies are included:

```bash
jQuery        : v3.7.1+
DataTables    : v1.13.6+
Bootstrap     : v5.3.2+ (for modals & styling)
jQuery UI     : v1.13.2+ (for datepicker)
```

---

## ⚙️ Installation

### 1. Clone the Repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/ActiveBeanCounter/editable-datatable.git
```

### 2. Include Dependencies in HTML

```html
<!-- jQuery -->
<script src="https://code.jquery.com/jquery-3.7.1.min.js"></script>

<!-- DataTables -->
<link rel="stylesheet" href="https://cdn.datatables.net/1.13.6/css/jquery.dataTables.min.css">
<script src="https://cdn.datatables.net/1.13.6/js/jquery.dataTables.min.js"></script>

<!-- Bootstrap -->
<link rel="stylesheet" href="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/bootstrap@5.3.2/dist/css/bootstrap.min.css">
<script src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/bootstrap@5.3.2/dist/js/bootstrap.bundle.min.js"></script>

<!-- jQuery UI (Datepicker) -->
<link rel="stylesheet" href="https://code.jquery.com/ui/1.13.2/themes/base/jquery-ui.css">
<script src="https://code.jquery.com/ui/1.13.2/jquery-ui.min.js"></script>
```

### 3. Include the Plugin

```html
<script src="js/editableTable.js"></script>
```

### 4. Backend Setup (e.g. `data.php`)

Ensure you have a backend endpoint (e.g., `data.php`) that handles:
- `GET` for fetching data
- `POST` for adding/updating/deleting records

---

## 📖 Usage

### 1. Create the HTML Table

```html
<table id="myTable" class="display" width="100%">
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th><input type="checkbox" id="selectAll"></th>
      <th>Id</th>
      <th>First name</th>
      <th>Last name</th>
      <th>Position</th>
      <th>Office</th>
      <th>Start date</th>
      <th>Salary</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
</table>
```

### 2. Add CSS

```html
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/style.css">
```

### 3. Initialize the Plugin

```html
<script>
$(document).ready(function() {
  $('#myTable').makeEditableTable({
    dataUrl: 'data.php',
    editableModes: ['inline', 'bubble', 'row'],
    enableAdd: true,
    enableDelete: true,
    columns: [
      {
        data: null,
        orderable: false,
        className: 'select-checkbox',
        defaultContent: '',
        render: function(data, type, row) {
          return `<input type="checkbox" class="row-select" data-id="${row.id}">`;
        }
      },
      { data: 'id' },
      { data: 'first_name', editType: 'text' },
      { data: 'last_name', editType: 'text' },
      { data: 'position', editType: 'select', options: ['Software Developer', 'Data Analyst', 'IT'] },
      { data: 'office', editType: 'text' },
      { data: 'start_date', editType: 'date' },
      { data: 'salary', editType: 'number' }
    ]
  });
});
</script>
```

---

## 🛠 Configuration Example

```js
{
  dataUrl: 'data.php',              // AJAX data source
  editableModes: ['inline', 'row'], // Editing modes
  enableAdd: true,                  // Show 'Add' button
  enableDelete: true,               // Show 'Delete' button
  columns: [
    { data: 'first_name', editType: 'text' },
    { data: 'start_date', editType: 'date' },
    { data: 'position', editType: 'select', options: ['Option1', 'Option2'] }
  ]
}
```

---

## 📄 License

MIT License

Copyright (c) [2025] [Oakstree]
```
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all
copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE
SOFTWARE.
```

Commit message:

Advance select options (#5)
* updated lib

* added changelog

* added non editable

README.md, after:

# 📝 Editable DataTable Plugin

A **jQuery plugin** to create editable DataTables with **inline**, **bubble**, and **full-row editing** modes. Built using **jQuery**, **DataTables**, and **Bootstrap**, it allows users to interactively **add, edit, and delete** table records with various input types like text, date, and select.

---

## 🚀 Features

- ✏️ **Multiple Editing Modes**: Inline, bubble, and row-based editing.
- ➕ **Add & Delete Records**: Manage records via modals and checkboxes.
- 🛠️ **Customizable Columns**: Supports `text`, `date`, and `select` input types.
- ☑️ **Checkbox Selection**: Bulk-select rows for deletion.
- 🔢 **Number Formatting**: Supports number formatting for fields like salary or quantity.
- 🆓 **Open Source**: MIT License – free to use and modify.

---

## 📦 Prerequisites

Ensure the following dependencies are included:

```bash
jQuery        : v3.7.1+
DataTables    : v1.13.6+
Bootstrap     : v5.3.2+ (for modals & styling)
jQuery UI     : v1.13.2+ (for datepicker)
```

---

## ⚙️ Installation

### 1. Clone the Repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/ActiveBeanCounter/editable-datatable.git
```

### 2. Include Dependencies in HTML

```html
<!-- jQuery -->
<script src="https://code.jquery.com/jquery-3.7.1.min.js"></script>

<!-- DataTables -->
<link rel="stylesheet" href="https://cdn.datatables.net/1.13.6/css/jquery.dataTables.min.css">
<script src="https://cdn.datatables.net/1.13.6/js/jquery.dataTables.min.js"></script>

<!-- Bootstrap -->
<link rel="stylesheet" href="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/bootstrap@5.3.2/dist/css/bootstrap.min.css">
<script src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/bootstrap@5.3.2/dist/js/bootstrap.bundle.min.js"></script>

<!-- jQuery UI (Datepicker) -->
<link rel="stylesheet" href="https://code.jquery.com/ui/1.13.2/themes/base/jquery-ui.css">
<script src="https://code.jquery.com/ui/1.13.2/jquery-ui.min.js"></script>
```

### 3. Include the Plugin

```html
<script src="js/editableTable.js"></script>
```

### 4. Backend Setup (e.g. `data.php`)

Ensure you have a backend endpoint (e.g., `data.php`) that handles:
- `GET` for fetching data
- `POST` for adding/updating/deleting records

---

## 📖 Usage

### 1. Create the HTML Table

```html
<table id="myTable" class="display" width="100%">
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th><input type="checkbox" id="selectAll"></th>
      <th>Id</th>
      <th>First name</th>
      <th>Last name</th>
      <th>Position</th>
      <th>Office</th>
      <th>Start date</th>
      <th>Salary</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
</table>
```

### 2. Add CSS

```html
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/style.css">
```

### 3. Initialize the Plugin

```html
<script>
$(document).ready(function() {
  $('#myTable').makeEditableTable({
    dataUrl: 'data.php',
    editableModes: ['inline', 'bubble', 'row'],
    enableAdd: true,
    enableDelete: true,
    columns: [
      {
        data: null,
        orderable: false,
        className: 'select-checkbox',
        defaultContent: '',
        render: function(data, type, row) {
          return `<input type="checkbox" class="row-select" data-id="${row.id}">`;
        }
      },
      { data: 'id' },
      { data: 'first_name', editType: 'text' },
      { data: 'last_name', editType: 'text' },
      { data: 'position', editType: 'select', options: ['Software Developer', 'Data Analyst', 'IT'] },
      { data: 'office', editType: 'text' },
      { data: 'start_date', editType: 'date' },
      { data: 'salary', editType: 'number' }
    ]
  });
});
</script>
```

---

## 🛠 Configuration Example

### ✅ Example 1

```js
{
  dataUrl: 'data.php',              // AJAX data source
  editableModes: ['inline', 'row'], // Editing modes
  enableAdd: true,                  // Show 'Add' button
  enableDelete: true,               // Show 'Delete' button
  columns: [
    { data: 'first_name', editType: 'text' },
    { data: 'start_date', editType: 'date' },
    { data: 'position', editType: 'select', options: ['Option1', 'Option2'] }
  ]
}
```
### ✅ Example 2

```js
{
  dataUrl: 'data.php',
  editableModes: ['bubble'],
  enableAdd: true,
  enableDelete: true,
  columns: [
    { data: 'id', editType: null },
    { data: 'first_name', editType: 'text', required: true },
    { data: 'start_date', editType: 'date' },
    { data: 'position', editType: 'select', 
      options: [
          { value: 'id1', label: 'Software Developer' },
          { value: 'id2', label: 'Frontend Developer' }
      ] }
  ]
}
```
---

## 📜 Changelog

### Version 1.1.0
- **Default Edit Mode**: Added logic to set inline as the default edit mode if no mode is specified and inline is not already included in editableModes.
- **Enhanced Select Inputs**: Updated select inputs to support objects with value and label properties for more flexible option definitions, with backward compatibility for simple arrays.
- **Form Validation**: Added support for required property in column definitions to enforce mandatory fields, with error messages displayed in the modal for invalid submissions.
- **Editing Restriction**: Restricted editing to columns with defined editType properties to prevent editing non-editable cells.


## 📄 License

MIT License

Copyright (c) [2025] [Oakstree]
```
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all
copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE
SOFTWARE.
```
